+++
title = "Languages, Systems, and Data Seminar (Spring 2026)"
date = 2026-03-27T13:19:27-07:00
math = false

+++

**Time**: Fridays, noon - 1:05pm (PT) <br />
**Location**: The Internet / The LSD Lab (Engineering 2, Room 398) <br />
**Organizers**: Lindsey Kuper, Tyler Sorensen, Reese Levine, and Achilles Benetopoulos <br />

---

The Languages, Systems, and Data Seminar meets weekly to discuss interesting topics in the areas of programming languages, systems, databases, formal methods, security, software engineering, verification, architecture, and beyond.  Our goal is to encourage interactions and discussions between students, researchers, and faculty with interests in these areas.  The seminar is open to everyone interested.  Participating UCSC students should register for the 2-credit course CSE 280O (let the organizers know if you're an undergrad and need a permission code).

For spring 2026, we will continue to host the LSD Seminar in a hybrid fashion. Anyone can attend on Zoom, and local folks can gather in person in the lab. Speakers can join either in person or on Zoom, whichever is convenient.

Talks will be advertised on the [ucsc-lsd-seminar-announce](https://groups.google.com/g/ucsc-lsd-seminar-announce) (for anyone) and [lsd-group](https://groups.google.com/a/ucsc.edu/g/lsd-group/members) (for UCSC-affiliated people) mailing lists.

| Date  | Speaker | Title |
|-------|---------|---------|
| [April 3](#apr-3) | No Speaker | Social Hour |
| [April 10](#apr-10) | Audrey Cheng | Rethinking Database Optimization for Modern Workloads |
| [April 17](#apr-17) | Achilles Benetopoulos | Conference Practice Talk |
| [April 24](#apr-24) | Elizaveta Pertseva | Automating Verification of ZKP Arithmetizations in Lean |
| [May 1](#may-1) | _TBD_ | _TBD_ |
| [May 8](#may-8) | Nikos Pagonas | _TBD_ |
| [May 15](#may-15) | Micah Murray | _TBD_ |
| [May 22](#may-22) | Thalia Archibald | UNIX V4: History and Recovery |
| [May 29](#may-29) | Zheyuan Chen | _TBD_ |
| [June 5](#june-5) | Scott Kovach | _TBD_ |

---

## April 3

**Speaker:** No Speaker

Social Hour in place of talk.

## April 10

**Speaker:** Audrey Cheng

**Title:** Rethinking Database Optimization for Modern Workloads

**Abstract:** Data systems face unprecedented scalability demands as modern applications, especially
AI workloads, evolve rapidly. These shifts make it increasingly difficult to maintain both
performance and correctness, which are the core properties that databases must provide. In this
talk, I discuss how to rethink database optimization by exploiting workload semantics in modern
large-scale applications and how we can scale these efforts by automating this optimization with AI.
First, I will present my work on reducing data contention, which remains a crucial performance
bottleneck, by leveraging contention patterns in modern workloads. My research addresses this
challenge via transaction scheduling: instead of resolving conflicts after they occur, I focus on
preventing them by reordering transactions to avoid conflicts before execution. I will then discuss
how we build on these results by leveraging AI-driven methods to enable the rapid exploration and
generation of optimization methods, with the broader goal of automating performance optimization in
data systems.

**Bio:** Audrey is a PhD student at UC Berkeley, advised by Natacha Crooks and Ion Stoica. Her
research focuses on performance optimization for database systems. Her work has been deployed in
industry databases at Meta, PlanetScale, and TiDB. She was named a Rising Star in EECS and has
received an NSF GRFP Fellowship, a Meta Research PhD Fellowship, a Berkeley Chancellor’s Fellowship,
a VLDB Best Industry Paper Award, and invitations to the Best of VLDB journal.

## April 17

This week we will have practice talks for upcoming conference presentations.

Achilles Benetopoulos: *Yield Not Thy Core*, to be presented at EuroSys.

## April 24

**Speaker:** Elizaveta Pertseva

**Title:** Automating Verification of ZKP Arithmetizations in Lean

**Abstract:** Many modern Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) systems rely on arithmetizations to encode
machine level (bitvector) arithmetic as finite field operations. The correctness of these
arithmetizations is crucial for soundness, but constructing them can be error-prone. Existing
verification workflows are either manual, requiring substantial human effort, or rely on SMT
solvers, which scale poorly on these problems. In this talk, I will discuss existing verification
tools and present our novel automated Lean-based approach that uses type translation to enable more
scalable and trustworthy verification of ZKP arithmetizations.

**Bio:** Elizaveta Pertseva is a 3rd year PhD at Stanford advised by Clark Barrett. Her research
focuses on automatically formally verifying cryptographic primitives.

## May 1

**Speaker:** TBD

**Title:** TBD

**Abstract:** TBD

## May 8

**Speaker:** Nikos Pagonas

**Title:** TBD

**Abstract:** TBD

## May 15

**Speaker:** Micah Murray

**Title:** TBD

**Abstract:** TBD

## May 22

**Speaker:** Thalia Archibald

**Title:** UNIX V4: History and Recovery

**Abstract:** TBD

## May 29

**Speaker:** Zheyuan Chen

**Title:** TBD

**Abstract:** TBD

## June 5

**Speaker:** Scott Kovach

**Title:** TBD

**Abstract:** TBD

[Archive](../)
